# Exercise 2

### The address space

1. Compile and run `aspace.c` in this directory.

2. Read the code.  You might want to [read about malloc here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/c_standard_library/c_function_malloc.htm).

3. Based on the output, draw a sketch of the virtual address space (see page 80 of HFC).  Show the relative locations of the stack, heap, globals, constants, and code.

   - I see that code and constants are very close together, and the stack is a long way from the rest of the address space.

4. Add a second call to `malloc` and check whether the heap on your system grows up (toward larger addresses).  

   - It does move up. Interestingly, it's usually in the same range (between 0x610000 and 0x1a1c00) on subsequent compiles. But main is almost always in the exact same spot.

5. Add a function that prints the address of a local variable, and check whether the stack grows down. 

   - It actually seems to grow up, interestingly. Maybe my calls are being optimized into a different order? `var3` is always initialized after `var2`, but it also always has a slightly higher address.

   - I think I found the answer to "why is it happening this way?" in the following two lines of assembly code: 

     `movl	$5, -40(%rbp)`

     `movl	$6, -36(%rbp)`

   - Here's what's going on: 

     - The first line takes the value of `var2` (5), and puts it in the address that's 40 bytes beneath the stack pointer. In one particular case, that's at `0x7ffec1dcb308`.
     - The second line takes the value of` var3` (6), and puts it 36 bytes shy of the stack pointer, in this case at `0x7ffec1dcb30c`. Notice how that's 4 bytes farther "up" from `var2`, which is the size on an int.
     - When I add a `var4`, it's placed 4 bytes up from `var3`. `var2` is now 44 bytes beneath the stack pointer.
     - So, in the strict order I wrote the code, new local variables are growing up. But relative to the stack pointer, all the local variables are down.

6. Choose a random number between 1 and 32, and allocate two chunks with that size.  
  How much space is there between them?  Hint: Google knows how to subtract hexadecimal numbers.

  - There are 32 bits between two size-7 blocks of memory. There are, interestingly, 144 bits between two size-128 blocks of memory. There are 80 bits between two size-63 chunks... 64 between two size-49 blocks, 48 between two size-33 blocks.

  - Alright, I'm going to make a table of ranges.

  - | Range | Size (bits) |
    | ----- | ----------- |
    | 0-24  | 32          |
    | 25-40 | 48          |
    | 41-56 | 64          |

    It seems like you get discrete 16-bit chunks of memory (as you would expect), but for some reason there's an extra 8 bits tacked on there. Hmm. That must be some sort of 8-bit marker character.


### Stack allocated data

1.  Read `stack.c`, which should be in this directory.  What is it
  intended to do?  What would the output be if the program worked as
  expected?
  - It seems like the idea is to initialize an array of all 42s with foo, change it so that the values count from 0 to SIZE-1 using bar, and then print each value out one at a time.
2.  Compile it.  Do you get a warning?  What does it mean?
    - The compiler says "warning: function returns address of local variable". The issue is that foo creates a local variable called array and then returns its address (which is on the stack) to whatever function called it. But when execution of a program is done, the stack is cleared.
3.  Run it.  What happens?  You might get a segmentation fault, or you might get
  some strange output.  Can you explain it?  You might find it
  helpful to draw a stack diagram.
  - I just got a segmentation fault. The issue is that once the stack is cleared, the pointer `*array` points at unallocated memory.
4.  Comment out the `print` statements in `foo()` and `bar()` and run
  it again.  What happens now?
  - I get the same result. I think it was throwing the error before the print statements had a chance to execute.
5.  Add comments to the code to explain these experiments and the results,
  then check the code in to the repo.

Moral: Don't return pointers to stack allocated data!

### Adder
Create a file named `adder.c` and write a program that allows the user to enter integers, one per line, until the user hits Control-D, which is the end-of-file (EOF) character.

It should convert the numbers from input strings to integers and store the integers in an array.  The program should produce appropriate error messages if the user enters something that exceeds the length of the input buffer, or can't be converted to an integer.  It should also produce an error message if the user enters more numbers than will fit in the array.

After the user enters Control-D, the program should add up the numbers in the array and print the result.  

Your program should be divided into at least two functions with well designed interfaces.

Optionally, the program should produce an error if the sum exceeds the largest integer that can be represented.

Hint: You will probably want to use two functions we haven't seen yet:

* strlen: [Read about it here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/c_standard_library/c_function_strlen.htm)

* atoi: [Read about it here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/c_standard_library/c_function_atoi.htm)

Before you use there functions, you need to `#include <string.h>`.

Notes to self: Compile with -g flag for debug, then run gdb with your compiled program
